Consider a function f(x) that is periodic on the interval 0 ≤ x ≤ L. An example is shown
in Fig. 1. Fourier’s theorem works even if f(x) isn’t continuous, although an interesting thing
x
f(x)
L
Figure 1 happens at the discontinuities, which we’ll talk about in Section 3.6. Other conventions for
the interval are −L ≤ x ≤ L, or 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, or −π ≤ x ≤ π, etc. There are many different
conventions, but they all lead to the same general result in the end. If we assume 0 ≤ x ≤ L
periodicity, then Fourier’s theorem states that f(x) can be written as
f(x) = a0 +
X∞
n=1
·
an cos µ
2πnx
L
¶
+ bn sin µ
2πnx
L
¶¸ (1)
where the an and bn coefficients take on certain values that we will calculate below. This
expression is the Fourier trigonometric series for the function f(x). We could alternatively
not separate out the a0 term, and instead let the sum run from n = 0 to ∞, because
cos(0) = 1 and sin(0) = 0. But the normal convention is to isolate the a0 term.
With the 2π included in the arguments of the trig functions, the n = 1 terms have period
L, the n = 2 terms have period L/2, and so on. So for any integer n, an integral number
of oscillations fit into the period L. The expression in Eq. (1) therefore has a period of (at
most) L, which is a necessary requirement, of course, for it to equal the original periodic
function f(x). The period can be shorter than L if, say, only the even n’s have nonzero
coefficients (in which case the period is L/2). But it can’t be longer than L; the function
repeats at least as often as with period L.
We’re actually making two statements in Eq. (1). The first statement is that any periodic
function can be written this way. This is by no means obvious, and it is the part of the
theorem that we’re accepting here. The second statement is that the an and bn coefficients
take on particular values, assuming that the function f(x) can be written this way. It’s
reasonably straightforward to determine what these values are, in terms of f(x), and we’ll
do this below. But we’ll first need to discuss the concept of orthogonal functions.
